E2fsprogs 1.33 (April 21, 2003)
===============================

Added a new utility program, logsave, which captures the output of a
command in a log file, even if the containing directory hasn't been
mounted yet (in which case the it saves the output in memory until it
can write out the logfile).  This is useful for capturing the
output of fsck during the boot sequence.

Fixed some portability problems that were causing problems under
the Cygwin32 environment.

Mke2fs now interprets a negative number to the -b option as a minimum
block size.

Fixed a bug in mke2fs which was incorrectly checking the argument to
the -g option if the default block size was used.  (Addresses Debian
bug #188319)

Fsck now explicitly ignores tmpfs and devpts, and it will complain if
it can not find filesystem checkers for jfs, reseirfs, and xfs.

E2fsck now updates the global free block and inode counters from the
block group specific counters quietly.  This is needed for an
experimental patch which eliminates locking the entire filesystem when
allocating blocks or inodes; if the filesystem is not unmounted
cleanly, the global counts may not be accurate.

Imported bug fixes to the EVMS plugin from the EVMS 2.0 tree.  (EVMS
2.0 is not yet supported; this only pulled in the bug fixes: fixed
possible hangs caused by bugs in calling waitpid, and not setting the
pipe to non-blocking mode; also fixed a file descriptor leak; made
sure all functions call log entry/exit functions.)

Badblocks now flushes its output file as bad blocks are discovered.

The uuid library is now more paranoid about assuming the correctness
of the /dev/random device; it mixes in a stream of bytes from
random/srandom, just in case.

Update Debian files to reflect the fact that I am now the Debian
maintainer of e2fsprogs.  Other various Debian-specific packaging
cleanups.

Move the source tarball generation functions from the top-level
makefile to the util/gen-tarball script.  

Updated the Turkish .po translation file.

Added Heimdal and MIT krb5 extensions to the com_err library to make
it more compatible with com_err libraries from those distributions.

Changed dumpe2fs to always display the superblock fields relating to
the journalling and/or directory indexing feature even if those
features are not enabled.

Updated and clarify copyright statement vis-a-vis alpha releases of
e2fsprogs.

The ss library will now try to dynamically link to the readline
library and use it if it is present in the system.  This means that
the debugfs program now has line editing and history features.  The
SS_READLINE_PATH environment variable is used to find a readline or
readline-compatible library.

E2fsck now finds most duplicate filenames (all when rebuilding all
directories via the -D option) and offers to delete or rename
duplicate filenames/directory entries.  (Addresses Debian Bug #176814).

Fix bug in e2image.  When writing out a raw image file, include data
blocks from symlinks that do not store the symlink within the inode.

Fix bug in resize2fs which incorrectly moved the block and inode
bitmaps for sparse superblock filesystems and incorrectly marked
blocks as in use.  (Addresses Debian bug #174766)
 
Added a new shared library, the blkid library, which efficiently
allows fsck, mke2fs, e2fsck, and tune2fs to be able to look up LABEL
and UUID filesystem specifiers without needing to search all of the
devices in the system.  Instead, the device is looked up in a cache
file, and then verified to make sure the blkid cache is correct.

Tune2fs and e2label will accept LABEL=xxx and UID=yyy specifiers for
the device name, using the blkid library.  (Addresses Debian bugs
#166048, #179671)

Fsck now supports backslash escapes in /etc/fstab so that \040 can be
used for spaces in device labels.

Removed 32-bit limitations for debugfs's dump command.

If the user specifies a large number of inodes, Mke2fs will
automatically adjust the number of blocks per group to find a valid
set of filesystem parameters.

Add workaround to detect broken MD devices where when some of the
underlying devices are marked read-only, writes to the MD device are
silently dropped.  E2fsck will detect if there is an attempt to run
the journal twice, and abort with an error if this is the case.
(Addresses IBM Bugzilla bug #1226)

E2fsck will print an error if more than one of the -p/-a, -n or -y
options are specified.

E2fsck will fix HTREE corruptions in preen mode, without stopping the
boot process.  This is needed because the 2.4 ext2 filesystem
accidentally had the INDEX_FL backwards compatibility code removed.

Mke2fs no longer creates filesystems with the dir_index flag set by
default; the user has to specifically request it.

Update and clarified various man pages. (Addresses Debian bugs
#173612, #175233, #175113, and #170497, #185945, #188318)

Created man page for the mk_cmds program (from the libss library).

Programmer's notes: 
-------------------

Fix various gcc -Wall nits.

Fixed a lot of portability problems that caused e2fsprogs not to build
successfully under Solaris and Apple/Darwin.

Fixed a Makefile dependency to allow building e2fsprogs using parallel
make jobs.

Changes to create a subset distribution which consists only of the
et, ss, uuid, and blkid libraries.  The configure script and top-level
makefile were changed to support working with a subset distribution.

Removed EXT2_FEATURE_RO_COMPAT_BTREE_DIR mention of since it's not
actually used, and might people who are looking for
EXT2_FEATURE_COMPAT_DIR_INDEX, which is in use.

Updated debian files to fix a number of Lintian warnings.

Updated config.guess and config.sub with newer versions from the FSF.

Removed unnecessary libraries from being linked into the fsck, lsattr, 
chattr, and blkid executables.

