E2fsprogs 1.37 (March 21, 2005)
===============================

Add support for checking the validity of Extended Attributes stored in
inodes to e2fsck.

Add support for dumping the contents of large inodes to debugfs,
including the extended attributes stored in inodes.

Fix mke2fs, e2fsck, debugfs, and the ext2fs_mkdir function so that
when we create a new inode we make sure that the extra information in
the inode (any extra fields in a large inode and any ea-in-inode
information) is initialized correctly.  This can take place when
mke2fs creates the root and lost+found directory, when e2fsck creates
a new root inode or a new lost+found directory, and when the user uses
the debugfs write, mknod, or mkdir commands.  Otherwise, the newly
create inode could inherit garbage (or old EA information) from a
previously deleted inode.

Fixed a bug in e2fsck so it would notice if a file with an extended
attribute block was exactly 2**32 blocks, such that i_blocks wrapped
to zero.

Added support to filefrag to detect files which are using the new
experimental file extents format, and use the non-ext2 algorithm in
that case.  Fixed a bug to avoid reporting a false discontinuity if
there is one or more unallocated blocks at the beginning of a file.

Duplicated a check for noticing whether or not the number of blocks
(given a certain blocksize) is greater than 2**32 when the
BLKGETSIZE64 ioctl is not available to ext2fs_get_device_size().  This
allows mke2fs to automatically use a larger blocksize when creating a
filesystem on a very large device when run on systems that do not
support BLKGETSIZE64.

Fix the I18N build which was broken in e2fsprogs 1.36 because the
build system had been switched to treat the .gmo files as shipped
files (for backwards compatibility with systems that have older GNU
I18N tools installed), but the gen_tarball.in script was still
removing the .gmo files from the official source distribution.

Fixed various Debian packaging issues --- see debian/changelog for
details.  (Addresses Debian Bugs ##296769, #299341)

Programmer's notes:
-------------------

Added new functions to the e2p library which convert between a string
and os_type: e2p_os2string() and e2p_string2os(), and used them to
make the generated binaries more compact.

Fixed a compile-time error on Darwin systems.

Cleaned up the lib/ext2fs Makefile slightly.

