E2fsprogs 1.38 (June 30, 2005)
==============================

Fix blkid's test programs (built with "make check") compile correctly
even without "configure --enable-blkid-debug".

Fix ia64 core dump bug caused by e2fsprogs running afoul of C99 strict
type aliasing rules on newer gcc compilers.  (Addresses Red Hat
Bugzilla ##161183.)

Fix com_err library to make it more compatible with recent changes
made to the com_err library in MIT Kerberos V5 version 1.4.
(Addresses Sourceforge Bug #1150146)

General cleanup of messages printed by e2fsprogs programs for grammar,
consistency, and to make life easier for translators.  Fixed a few
strings containing English that had not been marked as needing
translations.  Removed strings that do not need to be translated, to
make life easier for translators.

Mke2fs and badblocks will take advantage of a feature in Linux 2.6 to
test to see if a device appears to be in use instead of just relying
on /proc/mounts and /etc/mtab.  (Addresses Debian Bug #308594).

Fix portability problem in the filefrag program affecting platforms
where the size of an integer is smaller than the size of a long.
(Addresses Debian Bug #309655)

Mke2fs will now use a larger journal by default for filesystems
greater than 4GB.  (128 MB instead of 32MB).

Mke2fs will refuse to create filesystems greater than 2**31-1 blocks,
unless forced.  This is to avoid signed vs. unsigned kernel bugs in
block numbers that still need to be fixed.

The blkid program has a new option which will more efficiently search
for device when it is known (or expected) that only one matching
device will be found in the system, such as when doing a lookup by
UUID.

Debian's e2fsprogs-specific initrd fragment will avoid including
unnecessary libraries into the initrd ramdisk by unsetting LD_PRELOAD
and LD_LIBRARY_PATH, and filtering out libraries found in
/etc/ld.so.preload.  (Addresses Debian Bug: #304003)

Fixed a potential portability issue in the blkid programs for
architectures where the char type is unsigned.  (Addresses Sourceforge
Bug: #1180585)

Fix a bug in filefrag so that it doesn't falsely count an extra
discontinuity when the first block found is an indirect block.
(Addresses Debian Bug #307607).

Fix blkid's recognition of cramfs filesystems, and enhance it to be
able to handle cramfs labels.

Fix debugfs's stat command to not core dump when a filesystem is not
open.

Fix e2fsck's handling of error conditions caused by the resize inode
claiming blocks that are also used by other inodes, a filesystem
corruption which was commonly caused by a bug in Fedora Core 3's
resize2fs program.

Fixed bug in filefrag which caused it to fail on non-ext2/3
filesystems.  (Addresses Debian Bug: #303509)

If the superblock last mount time indicates that the system clock may
not be accurate, then e2fsck will omit checking inodes' deletion time
field for indications of a potential corrupted orphaned inode list.
(Previously e2fsck only omitted these LOW_DTIME checks when the
superblock's last write time looked insane.)

Fixed a IA64 core dump bug in the e2p library which affected dumpe2fs.
(Addresses Debian bug #302200)

Make the blkid library more paranoid about being run from setgid
programs, and to use __secure_getenv() from libc if it is available.

Fixed spelling mistakes, typos, and otherwise clarified man pages.
(Addresses Debian Bugs: #304591, #304592, #304594, #304597, #304593
and Sourceforge Bug: #1189803)

Updated and fixed translations.

Fixed various Debian packaging issues --- see debian/changelog for
details.

Programmer's notes:
-------------------

Ext2fs_set_bit(), ext2fs_clear_bit(), and ext2fs_test_bit( have been
changed to take an unsigned int for the bit number.  Negative bit
numbers were never allowed (and didn't make any sense), so this should
be a safe change.  This is needed to allow safe use of block numbers
greater than or equal to 2**31.

The compile_et program will avoid recreating generated foo_err.c and
foo_err.h files if no changes are necessary.  The compile_et program
will also atomically replace these files to avoid a potential parallel
build race problem on SMP systems.  (Addresses Sourceforge Bug:
#1157933)

Added a new function to the blkid library, blkid_probe_all_new(),
which only probes newly added disk devices, and change
blkid_find_dev_with_tag() to use this function so that when a
requested tag is not found, devices that were previously not checked
are searched before searching all devices in the system.

Added new functions to the blkid library, blkid_dev_set_search() and
blkid_dev_has_tag().

E2fsck's problem strings can now use @m and @n as abbreviations for
"multiply-claimed" and "invalid", respectively.

The e2fsprog.pot file now has an explanation of how the @-expansion
and %-expansion works, and strings in e2fsck/problem.c which contain @
characters now have comments in e2fsprogs.pot with the @-expansion to
make life easier for translators.

Fixed missing return values in the ext2fs library which could cause it
to return random garbage in certain error conditions.

Allow the current time to be overridden via the E2FSCK_TIME environment
variable for use in regression tests.

The test script driver program now exits with a non-zero status if
there any of its test that it ran failed.

Fixed problems with parabuilds on SMP systems.  (Addresses Sourceforge
Bug: #1157933)

Fixed "make check" so that it compiles correctly even when e2fsprogs'
header files have not be installed in the system include directories.
(Addresses Sourceforge Bug: #1180572)

Fixed gcc -Wall nits.

