E2fsprogs 1.43.4 (January 31, 2017)
===================================

Fix e2fsck to require that the system.data extended attribute is
always present even for files smaller than 60 bytes, to be consistent
with the kernel.

Fix a bug which was causing mke2fs -d and fuse2fs to improperly handle
Posix ACL's.

Fix a bug which could cause mke2fs -d to fail if there is an
zero-length file in source directory tree.

Clarify the default for the "proceed?" question printed by mke2fs and
tune2fs.  (Addresses Debian Bug: #852727)

Debugfs will now display project quota information.

Debugfs's do_set_xattr now uses C strings to parse extended attribute
values, and will print the extended attributes using either C strings
or hex bytes when using debugfs's do_get_xattr command.  It will now
allow developers to see the contents of the system.data extended
attribute.

Fix a bug in mke2fs where I/O errors weren't getting properly reported
to the user.

Fix multiblock writes in the unaligned Direct I/O fallback code.
(Which is rarely needed on Linux systems, but which is required on
Freebsd systems.)

Make sure the default mke2fs.conf file includes the uninit_bg feature
flag.  (Which was accidentally dropped in v1.43).

Fix a bug in resize2fs when operating on very large file systems which
have a block size different from the VM page size.

If the reported device size is absurdly large, mke2fs will now report
an error instead looping forever or crashing.

Fix various Coverity warnings and other memory leaks in fuse2fs and
extended attribute manipulation functions.

Replace a test file but which had a "non-commercial use-only"
copyright permission file with a newer version from the Cyrus imapd
package which now has a 4-clause BSD license, which was making some
lawyers nervous, even though the test file in question was only used
in lib/et's regression testing and was never included in any compiled
binary.  (Addresses Debian Bug: #840733)

Stop installing mkfs.ext4dev and fsck.ext4dev

Update Chinese, Czech, Polish, Serbian, and Spanish translations and
add the Finnish and Malay translation.  (Addresses-Debian-Bug: #774379)

Update various man pages (Addresses-Debian-Bug: #852726)

Programming notes
-----------------

Fix more FreeBSD-11 compatibility bugs, including some unmasked by
FreeBSD 11-rc2.

Fix the Mac build.

Fix build failure on RHEL 5.x systems caused by an old version of
libmagic.

Fix a number of bugs reported by ASAN that can cause some (mostly
harmless) memory dereferences beyond allocated memory.

