E2fsprogs 1.25 (September 20, 2001)
===================================

This is primarily a bug-fix release; no new features were added, but
there are a number of embarrassing bug fixes and cleanups applied.

Fix a bug mke2fs which causes stack garbage to be written to disk when
zapping disk sectors.  (This bug could cause mke2fs to core dump for
some kernels, I suspect with security enhancement patches.)

Remove unneeded #include of <linux/config.h> which was breaking
building e2fsprogs on the Hurd.  (Addresses Debian bug #112414.)

Updated tune2fs man page to reflect the fact that adding or removing a
journal doesn't require running e2fsck.

Remove use of AC_REQUIRE from autoconf which had been used to prevent
AC_CANONICAL_HOST from being called twice; unfortunately this causes
recent autoconf to bomb out since they don't allow AC_REQUIRE to be
used outside of autoconf macros.  Fortunately, it doesn't seem to be
necessary any more, anyway.

E2fsck will now not fall back to an alternate superblock if the user
specifies the superblock location explicitly on the command-line.
This allows easier recovery from a situation where the primary
superblock and block groups are slightly corrupted, but the backup
superblocks are completely broken.  

Fix problem which caused compile_et and mk_cmds to blow up if
e2fsprogs was in a directory with a pathname that contained spaces.

We are now more paranoid about checking the entry in /etc/mtab to make
sure the filesystem is really mounted, since some broken distributions
(read: Slackware) don't initialize /etc/mtab before checking non-root
filesystems.  (Slackware also doesn't check the root filesystem
separately, and reboot if the root filesystem had changes applied to
it, which is dangerous and broken, but there's nothing I can do about
that.)

Make UUID library C++ friendly by adding appropriate extern "C"
declarations and using const in the function declarations.

Fix up the com_err texinfo file so that it can product a valid info
file (previously, it could only be used to generate paper
documentation using texinfo.tex).

