E2fsprogs 1.23 (August 15, 2001)
================================

Add initial support for extended attributes (EA); e2fsck will
correctly handle a filesystem with EA's and check the EA blocks for
corruptions.

E2fsck's symlink sanity checking has been cleaned up.  It now checks
the i_size value of fast symlinks, and checks for immutable flags
being set of symlinks, etc.

E2fsck now offers to clear inodes which are special files that have a
non-zero i_blocks or i_size field.  (The i_size field check was in the
previous version of the code, but due to a bug it didn't offer to
clear the inode unless i_size and i_size_high were both non-zero.)

E2image can now create "raw" image files, which only contain the
filesystem metadata placed in a spare file so that e2fsck, dumpe2fs,
debugfs, etc., can be run directly on the raw image file.

Add support for the 64-bit block device patches.

Fixed bugs in creating external journals with a 1k blocksize.

Add initial support for external journals (so long as the external
journal only supports a single filesystem) in e2fsck.

Remove requirement for needing to run fsck on a filesystem after
removing a journal (either internal or external).

The man pages now document how to create and manage external journals.

Speed up the check of an ext3 filesystems by avoiding a needless flush
of all of the superblock and block group descriptors.

Speed up creating an internal journal using tune2fs in the case where
the filesystem has a lot blocks already allocated.

Tune2fs has been fixed to make sure that only error messages go to
stderr, and normal message go to stdout. (Addresses Debian bug #108555)

Fixed a minor bug in mke2fs; if -O none is passed to mke2fs, it will
now not set the sparse_super feature.  (Addresses Debian bug #108165)

Add support in fsck for the filesystem type "auto".

Fsck -A will not try to interpret device names for filesystems which
have a pass number is 0.  (Addresses Debian bug #106696).

Fsck prints a warning message if now valid filesystems are passed to
it.  (Addresses Debian Bug #107458.)

E2fsck now gives an explicit warning if there filesystem still has
errors at the end of the run. (Addresses Debian bug #104502)

E2fsck will set the EXT2_ERROR_FS flag if the journal superblock
reflects an error.  E2fsck will also not run the orphan list if the
filesystem contains errors, since the orphan list might be corrupted.

E2fsck now prints the number of large files when given the -v option.

Fixed minor memory leaks in e2fsck.

Some minor man pages updates. (Addresses Debian bug #30833, #108174)

