E2fsprogs 1.34 (July 25, 2003)
===============================

Fixed a bug introduced in E2fsprogs 1.30 which caused fsck to spin in
a tight loop while waiting for a child fsck to exit in some cases.
This burns CPU times which slows down the low-level filesystem check.

Added code to mke2fs to assure that the default block size for a
filesystem is at least as big as the sector size of the device, if it
can be determined.

Changed mke2fs and resize2fs to round the default size of a filesystem
to be an even multiple of the VM pagesize in order to avoid a Linux
kernel bug introduced when the storage of the buffer cache was moved
into the page cache.

Mke2fs will warn the user when creating a filesystem with journalling
and a blocksize greater than 4096.  (Addresses Debian bug #193773)

Fixed a bug in resize2fs which caused it to fail on filesystems with a
non-empty bad block list.  Resize2fs now discards any blocks on the
badblock list which are no longer part of the filesystem as the result
of a filesystem shrink.  (Note: this means that shrinking and then
enlarging a filesystem is no longer a reversible operation;
information about bad blocks in the part of the filesystem which is to
be chopped off will be lost.)

Changed resize2fs so the user can use prefixes to specify the units of
the new filesystem size (sectors, kilobytes, megabytes, or gigabytes),
and to make the error and informational messages explicitly display
the blocksize used by the filesystem, in order to avoid confusion.
(Addresses Debian bug: #189814)

Added a new debugfs command, dump_unused, which dumps the contents of
all unused blocks to stdout.  (Useful as an emergency try-to-find
deleted data command.)

Added a new debugfs command, imap, which prints the location of a
specified inode in the inode table.

Fixed a bug in the badblocks program which caused it to use one bit of
randomness in its non-destructive read/write test, instead of using a
full 8 bits of randomness.

Added a new option (-t) to badblocks, which allows the user to control
the test pattern(s) used when checking a disk.

The blkid probe function now more correctly detects UDF filesystems.

Fixed a bug in the blkid library which caused it to not update its
cache if a filesystem changes from having a label to not having a
label.

Fixed a bug in the blkid library which could avoid an infinite loop
in blkid_find_dev_with_tag() if /proc is not mounted and there the
/etc/blkid.tab file has not yet been created.

Fixed the badblocks program so that the destructive read/write test
honors the -c option, and to use O_DIRECT when possible to avoid
thrashing the system block buffer cache.

Fixed various NLS issues.
 - Added Czech and Swedish translations
 - Removed testing NYC translation
 - Fixed NLS support for message abbreviations in e2fsck
 - Remove de-utf.po, since we shouldn't have two versions using different
	charset encodings.
 - Used ngettext() (abbreviated with the macro P_(str1, str2, n)) to
	simplify the statistics reporting in e2fsck.

Changed configure.in so that its defaults for *BSD systems no longer
build an fsck wrapper, and not to install in /usr/local by default.

Fixed some minor spelling errors/typo's in e2fsck and the configure
script.

Fixed various Debian packaging issues (see debian/changelog). 

Updated and clarified man pages.  (Addresses Debian Bug #195616)

Programmer's notes: 
-------------------

Fix gcc -Wall nitpicks.

Updated gettext implementation used by e2fsprogs to 0.11.5, and enable
NLS support by default.  (Added partial workaround for gettext/Darwin
incompatibility problems.)

Added full MIT KRB5 and Himdall compatibility support to the com_err
library and the compile_et program.  (Addresses Debian bug #191900)

Added the blkid_known_fstype() function to the blkid library, which
returns true if it is passed a filesystem type which is recognized by
the blkid probing functions.

Improved the documentation for the blkid library.

Added the ext2fs_get_device_sectsize() function the the ext2fs library, which
returns the hardware sector size of a device, if it is available.

Added a dependency in the blkid library's .so file to the uuid
library, since the former uses the latter.  (Addresses Debian bug
#194094)

Added --with-diet-libc and --disable-evms to the configure script.

Fixed a minor memory leak in the badblocks program.

Fixed a portability problem in tune2fs --- not all systems have strptime().

Fixed a portability problem in debugfs with the use of getopt() more
than once.  Old-style BSD, new-style BSD, and Linux C libraries all do
things differently.

Add support Windows support to ext2fs_get_device_size().

Added (normally disabled) debugging code to the Unix I/O manager which
causes it to disable all userspace caching if the NO_IO_CACHE is
defined.

Changed the test I/O manager so it can always be linked into e2fsck,
mke2fs, and tune2fs if enabled via --enable-test-io-debug to the
configure script.  The test I/O manager will only print any debugging
information if the TEST_IO_FLAGS or TEST_IO_BLOCK environment
variables are set, which specifies which I/O operations are logged and
a block number to watch, respectively.  The log messages are sent to
stderr by default, unless a filename is specified via the
TEST_IO_LOGFILE environment variable.

